#LyX 1.6.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass report
\begin_preamble
\include{thesis.preamble}
\bibliographystyle{alpha}
\usepackage[left=2cm,right=2cm,top=2cm,bottom=3cm]{geometry}

\usepackage{listings}

\lstdefinelanguage{Alloy}
{
 sensitive=true,
 morecomment=[l]{--}
}

\lstset{language=Alloy}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing onehalf
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
\begin_inset CommandInset label
LatexCommand label
name "cha:Software"

\end_inset

Obtaining the Software and Example Models
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The following location allows files and software relating to this thesis
 to be downloaded.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

\family typewriter
http://www.tanarc.com/phd
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The following downloads are available.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
An electronic copy of this thesis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The Evolve modelling tool and Backbone runtime platform.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
A number of the example models used in this thesis, along with related source
 code where appropriate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The formal specification.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The site may be password protected to prevent search engine indexing.
 If prompted for a username and password, enter 
\family typewriter
phd
\family default
 for both.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Further instructions for using Evolve to execute the example applications
 are contained on the site.
 Evolve is compatible with any platform that has a recent Java runtime.
 JRE1.6 or greater is preferred, although the software also works with JRE1.5.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
